document new filters and stuff (#14760)
apache/druid: docs/querying/filters.md

## Selector filter

The simplest filter is a selector filter. The selector filter matches a specific dimension with a specific value. Selector filters can be used as the base filters for more complex Boolean expressions of filters.

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "selector".| Yes |
| `dimension` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |
| `value` | String value to match. | No. If not specified the filter matches NULL values. |

> | `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with extraction functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |
```

The selector filter can only match against `STRING` (single and multi-valued), `LONG`, `FLOAT`, `DOUBLE` types. Use the newer null and equality filters to match against `ARRAY` or `COMPLEX` types.

> When the selector filter matches against numeric inputs, the string `value` will be best-effort coerced into a numeric value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the selector filter matches against numeric inputs, the string `value` will be best effort coerced into a numeric value.
```

### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someColumn = 'hello'`

``` json
{ "type": "selector", "dimension": "someColumn", "value": "hello" }
```

### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someColumn IS NULL`.

``` json
{ "type": "selector", "dimension": "someColumn", "value": null }
```

## Equality Filter

The equality filter is a replacement for the selector filter with the ability to match against any type of column. The equality filter is designed to have more SQL compatible behavior than the selector filter and so can not match null values. To match null values use the null filter.

Druid's SQL planner uses the equality filter by default instead of selector filter whenever `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull=false`, or if `sqlUseBoundAndSelectors` is set to false on the [SQL query context](./sql-query-context.md).

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "equality".| Yes |
| `column` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |

> | `matchValueType` | String specifying the type of value to match, for example `STRING`, `LONG`, `DOUBLE`, `FLOAT`, `ARRAY<STRING>`, `ARRAY<LONG>`, or any other Druid type. The `matchValueType` determines how Druid interprets the `matchValue` to assist in converting to the type of the matched `column`. | Yes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `matchValueType` | String specifying the type of value to match. For example, `STRING`, `LONG`, `DOUBLE`, `FLOAT`, `ARRAY<STRING>`, `ARRAY<LONG>`, or any other Druid type. The `matchValueType` determines how Druid interprets the `matchValue` to assist in converting to the type of the matched `column`. | Yes |
```

Druid's SQL planner uses the null filter by default instead of selector filter whenever `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull=false`, or if `sqlUseBoundAndSelectors` is set to false on the [SQL query context](./sql-query-context.md).

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "null".| Yes |
| `column` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |

### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someColumn IS NULL`

```json
{ "type": "null", "column": "someColumn" }
```

## Column comparison filter

The column comparison filter is similar to the selector filter, but compares dimensions to each other. For example:

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "selector".| Yes |
| `dimensions` | List of [`DimensionSpec`](./dimensionspecs.md) to compare. | Yes |

`dimensions` is list of [DimensionSpecs](./dimensionspecs.md), making it possible to apply an extraction function if needed.

Note that the column comparison filter converts all values to strings prior to comparison. This allows differently-typed input columns to match without a cast operation.

> ### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someColumn = someLongColumn`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someColumn = someLongColumn`
```

#### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someColumn = 'a' OR otherColumn = 1234 OR anotherColumn IS NULL`

``` json
{
  "type": "or",
  "fields": [
    { "type": "equality", "column": "someColumn", "matchValue": "a", "matchValueType": "STRING" },
    { "type": "equality", "column": "otherColumn", "matchValue": 1234, "matchValueType": "LONG" },
    { "type": "null", "column": "anotherColumn" } 
  ]
}
```

### NOT

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "not".| Yes |
| `field` | Filter JSON objects, such as any other filter defined on this page or provided by extensions. | Yes |

#### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someColumn IS NOT NULL`

```json
{ "type": "not", "field": { "type": "null", "column": "someColumn" }}
```

## In filter
The in filter can match input rows against a set of values, where a match occurs if the value is contained in the set.

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "in".| Yes |
| `dimension` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |
| `values` | List of string value to match. | Yes |

> | `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with extraction functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |
```

Reviewer: You could just do a search and replace all for the sentence case fix; I didn't comment on all of them

}
```

## Bound filter

Bound filters can be used to filter on ranges of dimension values. It can be used for comparison filtering like
greater than, less than, greater than or equal to, less than or equal to, and "between" (if both "lower" and
"upper" are set).

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "bound". | Yes |
| `dimension` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |
| `lower` | The lower bound string match value for the filter. | No |
| `upper`| The upper bound string match value for the filter. | No |
| `lowerStrict` | Boolean indicating whether to perform strict comparison on the `lower` bound (">" instead of ">="). | No, default: `false` |
| `upperStrict` | Boolean indicating whether to perform strict comparison on the upper bound ("<" instead of "<="). | No, default: `false`|
| `ordering` | String that specifies the sorting order to use when comparing values against the bound. Can be one of the following values: `"lexicographic"`, `"alphanumeric"`, `"numeric"`, `"strlen"`, `"version"`. See [Sorting Orders](./sorting-orders.md) for more details. | No, default: `"lexicographic"`|

> | `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with extraction functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |
```

When the bound filter matches against numeric inputs, the string `lower` and `upper` bound values are best-effort coerced into a numeric value when using the `"numeric"` mode of ordering.

The bound filter can only match against `STRING` (single and multi-valued), `LONG`, `FLOAT`, `DOUBLE` types. Use the newer range to match against `ARRAY` or `COMPLEX` types.

Note that the bound filter matches null values if you don't specify a lower bound. Use the range filter if SQL-compatible behavior.

> ### Example: equivalent to `WHERE 21 <= age <= 31`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: equivalent to `WHERE 21 <= age <= 31`
```

The simplest filter is a selector filter. The selector filter will match a specific dimension with a specific value. Selector filters can be used as the base filters for more complex Boolean expressions of filters.

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "selector".| Yes |
| `dimension` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |

> | `value` | String value to match. | No, if not specified the filter will match NULL values. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `value` | String value to match. | No, if not specified the filter matches NULL values. |
```

| `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |

The selector filter is limited to only being able to match against `STRING` (single and multi-valued), `LONG`, `FLOAT`,
`DOUBLE` types. Use the newer null and equality filters to match against `ARRAY` or `COMPLEX` types.

> When the selector filter matches against numeric inputs, the string `value` will be best effort coerced into a numeric value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the selector filter matches against numeric inputs, the string `value` will be best-effort coerced into a numeric value.
```

### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someColumn = 'hello'`

``` json
{ "type": "selector", "dimension": "someColumn", "value": "hello" }
```

### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someColumn IS NULL`.

``` json
{ "type": "selector", "dimension": "someColumn", "value": null }
```

## Equality Filter

The equality filter is a replacement for the selector filter with the ability to match against any type of column. The equality filter intends to have more SQL compatible behavior than the selector filter and so cannot match NULL values, use the null filter instead.

> Druid's SQL planner will by default use the equality filter instead of selector filter whenever `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull=false`, or if `sqlUseBoundAndSelectors` is set to false on the [SQL query context](./sql-query-context.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Druid's SQL planner uses the equality filter by default instead of selector filter whenever `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull=false`, or if `sqlUseBoundAndSelectors` is set to false on the [SQL query context](./sql-query-context.md).
```

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "equality".| Yes |
| `column` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |
| `matchValueType` | String specifying the type of value to match, e.g. `STRING`, `LONG`, `DOUBLE`, `FLOAT`, `ARRAY<STRING>`, `ARRAY<LONG>` etc. The `matchValueType` indicates how Druid should interpret the `matchValue` to assist in converting to the type of the `column` being matched. | Yes |

> | `matchValue` | Value to match, must not me null. | Yes |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `matchValue` | Value to match, must not be null. | Yes |
```

### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someColumn = 'hello'`

```json
{ "type": "equality", "column": "someColumn", "matchValueType": "STRING", "matchValue": "hello" }
```

### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someNumericColumn = 1.23`

```json
{ "type": "equality", "column": "someNumericColumn", "matchValueType": "DOUBLE", "matchValue": 1.23 }
```

### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someArrayColumn = ARRAY[1, 2, 3]`

```json
{ "type": "equality", "column": "someArrayColumn", "matchValueType": "ARRAY<LONG>", "matchValue": [1, 2, 3] }
```

## Null Filter

> The null filter is a partial replacement for the selector filter dedicated to matching NULL values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The null filter is a partial replacement for the selector filter. It is dedicated to matching null values.
```

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "null".| Yes |
| `column` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |

### Example: equivalent of `WHERE someColumn IS NULL`

```json
{ "type": "null", "column": "someColumn" }
```

## Column comparison filter

The column comparison filter is similar to the selector filter, but instead compares dimensions to each other. For example:

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "selector".| Yes |
| `dimensions` | List of [`DimensionSpec`](./dimensionspecs.md) to compare. | Yes |

`dimensions` is list of [DimensionSpecs](./dimensionspecs.md), making it possible to apply an extraction function if needed.

> Note that the column comparison filter converts all values to strings prior to comparison, which can allow differently typed input columns to still match each other without any sort of casting required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the column comparison filter converts all values to strings prior to comparison. This allows differently-typed input columns to match without a cast operation.
```

| `lower` | The lower bound string match value for the filter. | No |
| `upper`| The upper bound string match value for the filter. | No |
| `lowerStrict` | Boolean indicating whether to perform strict comparison on the `lower` bound (">" instead of ">="). | No, default: `false` |
| `upperStrict` | Boolean indicating whether to perform strict comparison on the upper bound ("<" instead of "<="). | No, default: `false`|
| `ordering` | String that specifies the sorting order to use when comparing values against the bound. Can be one of the following values: `"lexicographic"`, `"alphanumeric"`, `"numeric"`, `"strlen"`, `"version"`. See [Sorting Orders](./sorting-orders.md) for more details. | No, default: `"lexicographic"`|
| `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |

When the bound filter matches against numeric inputs, the string `lower` and `upper` bound values will be best effort coerced into a numeric value when using the `"numeric"` mode of ordering.

> The bound filter is limited to only being able to match against `STRING` (single and multi-valued), `LONG`, `FLOAT`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The bound filter can only match against `STRING` (single and multi-valued), `LONG`, `FLOAT`,
```

}
```

> ### Example: equivalent to `WHERE 'foo' <= name <= 'hoo'`, using the default lexicographic sorting order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: equivalent to `WHERE 'foo' <= name <= 'hoo'`, using the default lexicographic sorting order
```

}
```

> ### Example: equivalent to `WHERE age < 31`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: equivalent to `WHERE age < 31`
```

```

## Range filter

> The range filter is a replacement for the bound filter with the ability to compare against any type of column. The range filter has more SQL compliant behavior, and will never match NULL values, even if no lower bound is specified.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The range filter is a replacement for the bound filter. It compares against any type of column and has more SQL-compliant behavior than the bound filter. It won't match null values, even if you don't specify a lower bound.
```

> Druid's SQL planner will by default use the range filter instead of bound filter whenever `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull=false`, or if `sqlUseBoundAndSelectors` is set to false on the [SQL query context](./sql-query-context.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Druid's SQL planner uses the range filter by default instead of bound filter whenever `druid.generic.useDefaultValueForNull=false`, or if `sqlUseBoundAndSelectors` is set to false on the [SQL query context](./sql-query-context.md).
```

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "range".| Yes |
| `column` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |
| `matchValueType` | String specifying the type of bounds to match, e.g. `STRING`, `LONG`, `DOUBLE`, `FLOAT`, `ARRAY<STRING>`, `ARRAY<LONG>` etc. The `matchValueType` indicates how Druid should interpret the `matchValue` to assist in converting to the type of the `column` being matched and also defines the type of comparison to use when matching values. | Yes |

> | `lower` | Lower bound value to match. | No, at least one of `lower` or `upper` must not me null. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `lower` | Lower bound value to match. | No. At least one of `lower` or `upper` must not be null. |
```

> | `upper` | Upper bound value to match. | No, at least one of `lower` or `upper` must not me null. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `upper` | Upper bound value to match. | No. At least one of `lower` or `upper` must not be null. |
```

| `lowerOpen` | Boolean indicating if lower bound is open in the interval of values defined by the range (">" instead of ">="). | No |
| `upperOpen` | Boolean indicating if upper bound is open on the interval of values defined by range ("<" instead of "<="). | No |

> ### Example: equivalent to `WHERE 21 <= age <= 31`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: equivalent to `WHERE 21 <= age <= 31`
```

```json
{
    "type": "range",
    "column": "age",
    "matchValueType": "LONG",
    "lower": 21,
    "upper": 31
}
```

> ### Example: equivalent to `WHERE 'foo' <= name <= 'hoo'`, using STRING comparison.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: equivalent to `WHERE 'foo' <= name <= 'hoo'`, using STRING comparison
```

```json
{
    "type": "range",
    "column": "name",
    "matchValueType": "STRING",
    "lower": "foo",
    "upper": "hoo"
}
```

### Example: equivalent to `WHERE 21 < age < 31`

```json
{
    "type": "range",
    "column": "age",
    "matchValueType": "LONG",
    "lower": "21",
    "lowerOpen": true,
    "upper": "31" ,
    "upperOpen": true
}
```

> ### Example: equivalent to `WHERE age < 31`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: equivalent to `WHERE age < 31`
```

```json
{
    "type": "range",
    "column": "age",
    "matchValueType": "LONG",
    "upper": "31" ,
    "upperOpen": true
}
```

### Example: equivalent to `WHERE age >= 18`

```json
{
    "type": "range",
    "column": "age",
    "matchValueType": "LONG",
    "lower": 18
}
```

> ### Example: equivalent to `WHERE ARRAY['a','b','c'] < arrayColumn < ARRAY['d','e','f']`, using ARRAY comparison.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example: equivalent to `WHERE ARRAY['a','b','c'] < arrayColumn < ARRAY['d','e','f']`, using ARRAY comparison
```

```json
{
    "type": "range",
    "column": "name",
    "matchValueType": "ARRAY<STRING>",
    "lower": ["a","b","c"],
    "lowerOpen": true,
    "upper": ["d","e","f"],
    "upperOpen": true
}
```

## Like filter

Like filters can be used for basic wildcard searches. They are equivalent to the SQL LIKE operator. Special characters
supported are "%" (matches any number of characters) and "\_" (matches any one character).

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "like".| Yes |
| `dimension` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |

> | `pattern` | String LIKE pattern, such as "foo%" or "___bar".| Yes |

Reviewer: Should `___bar` have three underscores?

Author: idk, that was what the old docs said and I just moved it... in LIKE patterns underscores represent a single character, so this example matches anything that has bar starting from the 4th character like `foobar` :shrug:

| `escape`| A string escape character that can be used to escape special characters. | No |

> | `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |
> 
> Like filters support the use of extraction functions, see [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with extraction functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |

Like filters support the use of extraction functions, see [Filtering with extraction functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details.
```

Note that it is often more optimal to use a like filter instead of a regex for simple matching of prefixes.

### Example: matches values that start with "50."

``` json
{ "type": "regex", "dimension": "someColumn", "pattern": ^50.* }
```

## Interval filter

The Interval filter enables range filtering on columns that contain long millisecond values, with the boundaries specified as ISO 8601 time intervals. It is suitable for the `__time` column, long metric columns, and dimensions with values that can be parsed as long milliseconds.

This filter converts the ISO 8601 intervals to long millisecond start/end ranges and translates to an OR of Bound filters on those millisecond ranges, with numeric comparison. The Bound filters will have left-closed and right-open matching (i.e., start <= time < end).

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "interval". | Yes |
| `dimension` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |

> | `intervals` | A JSON array containing ISO-8601 interval strings. This defines the time ranges to filter on. | Yes |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `intervals` | A JSON array containing ISO-8601 interval strings that defines the time ranges to filter on. | Yes |
```

```json
{"type": "false" }
```

## Search filter

You can use search filters to filter on partial string matches.

```json
{
    "filter": {
        "type": "search",
        "dimension": "product",
        "query": {
          "type": "insensitive_contains",
          "value": "foo"
        }
    }
}
```

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "search". | Yes |
| `dimension` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |
| `query`| A JSON object for the type of search. See [search query spec](#search-query-spec) for more information. | Yes |
| `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |

### Search query spec

#### Contains

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "contains". | Yes |
| `value` | A String value to search. | Yes |
| `caseSensitive` | Whether the string comparison is case-sensitive or not. | No, default is false (insensitive) |

> #### Insensitive Contains

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Insensitive contains
```

}
```

## True filter

> The true filter is a filter which matches all values.  It can be used to temporarily disable other filters without removing the filter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A filter that matches all values.  You can use it to temporarily disable other filters without removing them.
```

```json
{ "type" : "true" }
```

## False filter

> The false filter matches no values. It can be used to force a query to match nothing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A filter that matches no values. You can use it to force a query to match no values.
```

```json
{"type": "false" }
```

## Search filter

Search filters can be used to filter on partial string matches.

```json
{
    "filter": {
        "type": "search",
        "dimension": "product",
        "query": {
          "type": "insensitive_contains",
          "value": "foo"
        }
    }
}
```

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "search". | Yes |
| `dimension` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |
| `query`| A JSON object for the type of search. See [search query spec](#search-query-spec) for more information. | Yes |
| `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |

> The search filter supports the use of extraction functions, see [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details.

Author: oops, meant to delete this since its in the table now

## Expression filter

The expression filter allows for the implementation of arbitrary conditions, leveraging the Druid expression system. This filter allows for complete flexibility, but it might be less performant than a combination of the other filters on this page due to the fact that not always being able to take advantage of the same optimizations others might benefit from.

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "expression" | Yes |
| `expression` | Expression string to evaluate into true or false. See the [Druid expression system](math-expr.md) for more details. | Yes |

### Example: expression based matching

```json
{ 
    "type" : "expression" ,
    "expression" : "((product_type == 42) && (!is_deleted))"
}
```

## JavaScript filter

The JavaScript filter matches a dimension against the specified JavaScript function predicate. The filter matches values for which the function returns true.

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "javascript" | Yes |
| `dimension` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |

> | `function` | JavaScript function which accepts a single argument, the dimension value, and returns either true or false. | Yes |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `function` | JavaScript function which accepts the dimension value as a single argument, and returns either true or false. | Yes |
```

| `extractionFn` | [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions) to apply to `dimension` prior to value matching. See [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details. | No |

### Example: matching any dimension values for the dimension `name` between `'bar'` and `'foo'`

```json
{
  "type" : "javascript",
  "dimension" : "name",
  "function" : "function(x) { return(x >= 'bar' && x <= 'foo') }"
}
```

> The JavaScript filter supports the use of extraction functions, see [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The JavaScript filter supports the use of extraction functions. See [Filtering with Extraction Functions](#filtering-with-extraction-functions) for details.
```

> > JavaScript-based functionality is disabled by default. Please refer to the Druid [JavaScript programming guide](../development/javascript.md) for guidelines about using Druid's JavaScript functionality, including instructions on how to enable it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> JavaScript-based functionality is disabled by default. Refer to the Druid [JavaScript programming guide](../development/javascript.md) for guidelines about using Druid's JavaScript functionality, including instructions on how to enable it.
```

## Extraction filter

> > The extraction filter is now deprecated. The selector filter with an extraction function specified

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The extraction filter is now deprecated. Use the selector filter with an extraction function instead.
```

> > provides identical functionality and should be used instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Extraction filter matches a dimension using some specific [Extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Extraction filter matches a dimension using a specific [extraction function](./dimensionspecs.md#extraction-functions).
```

> The following filter matches the values for which the extraction function has transformation entry `input_key=output_value` where

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following filter matches the values for which the extraction function has a transformation entry `input_key=output_value` where
```

> `output_value` is equal to the filter `value` and `input_key` is present as dimension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`output_value` is equal to the filter `value` and `input_key` is present as a dimension.
```

| Property | Description | Required |
| -------- | ----------- | -------- |
| `type` | Must be "extraction" | Yes |
| `dimension` | Input column or virtual column name to filter. | Yes |

> | `value` | String value to match. | No, if not specified the filter will match NULL values. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `value` | String value to match. | No. If not specified the filter matches null values. |
```

Druid supports filtering on timestamp, string, long, and float columns.

Note that only string columns and columns produced with the ['auto' ingestion spec](../ingestion/ingestion-spec.md#dimension-objects) also used by [type aware schema discovery](../ingestion/schema-design.md#type-aware-schema-discovery) have bitmap indexes. Queries that filter on other column types must
scan those columns.

### Filtering on multi-value string columns

All filters return true if any one of the dimension values is satisfies the filter.

> #### Example: multi-value match behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example: multi-value match behavior
```

{
  "type": "and",
  "fields": [
    {
      "type": "equality",
      "column": "someMultiValueColumn",
      "matchValueType": "STRING",
      "matchValue": "a"
    },
    {
      "type": "equality",
      "column": "someMultiValueColumn",
      "matchValueType": "STRING",
      "matchValue": "b"
    }
  ]
}
```
will successfully match the entire row, but not match a row with value `['a', 'c']`.

To express this filter in SQL, use [SQL multi-value string functions](./sql-multivalue-string-functions.md) such as `MV_CONTAINS`, which can be optimized by the planner to the same native filters.

### Filtering on numeric columns

Some filters, such as equality and range filters allow accepting numeric match values directly since they include a secondary `matchValueType` parameter.

When filtering on numeric columns using string based filters such as the selector, in, and bounds filters, you can write filter match values as if they were strings. In most cases, your filter will be
converted into a numeric predicate and will be applied to the numeric column values directly. In some cases (such as
the "regex" filter) the numeric column values will be converted to strings during the scan.

> #### Example: filtering on a specific value, `myFloatColumn = 10.1`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example: filtering on a specific value, `myFloatColumn = 10.1`
```

```json
{
  "type": "equality",
  "dimension": "myFloatColumn",
  "matchValueType": "FLOAT",
  "value": 10.1
}
```

or with a selector filter:

```json
{
  "type": "selector",
  "dimension": "myFloatColumn",
  "value": "10.1"
}
```

> #### Example: filtering on a range of values, `10 <= myFloatColumn < 20`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example: filtering on a range of values, `10 <= myFloatColumn < 20`
```

Druid supports filtering on timestamp, string, long, and float columns.

> Note that only string columns and columns produced with the ['auto' ingestion spec](../ingestion/ingestion-spec.md#dimension-objects) also used by [type aware schema discovery](../ingestion/schema-design.md#type-aware-schema-discovery) have bitmap indexes. Therefore, queries that filter on other column types will need to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that only string columns and columns produced with the ['auto' ingestion spec](../ingestion/ingestion-spec.md#dimension-objects) also used by [type aware schema discovery](../ingestion/schema-design.md#type-aware-schema-discovery) have bitmap indexes. Queries that filter on other column types must
```

scan those columns.

### Filtering on multi-value string columns

> All filters will return true if any one of the dimension values is satisfies the filter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All filters return true if any one of the dimension values satisfies the filter.
```

Given a multi-value STRING row with values `['a', 'b', 'c']`, a filter such as

```json
{ "type": "equality", "column": "someMultiValueColumn", "matchValueType": "STRING", "matchValue": "b" }
```
will successfully match the entire row. This can produce sometimes unintuitive behavior when coupled with the implicit UNNEST functionality of Druid [GroupBy](./groupbyquery.md) and [TopN](./topnquery.md) queries.

Additionally, contradictory filters may be defined and perfectly legal in native queries which will not work in SQL.

#### Example: SQL "contradiction"
This query is impossible to express as is in SQL since it is a contradiction that the SQL planner will optimize to false and match nothing.

Given a multi-value STRING row with values `['a', 'b', 'c']`, and filter such as
```json
{
  "type": "and",
  "fields": [
    {
      "type": "equality",
      "column": "someMultiValueColumn",
      "matchValueType": "STRING",
      "matchValue": "a"
    },
    {
      "type": "equality",
      "column": "someMultiValueColumn",
      "matchValueType": "STRING",
      "matchValue": "b"
    }
  ]
}
```
will successfully match the entire row, but not match a row with value `['a', 'c']`.

> To express this filter in SQL, one would need to use [SQL multi-value string functions](./sql-multivalue-string-functions.md) such as `MV_CONTAINS`, which can be optimized by the planner to the same native filters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To express this filter in SQL, use [SQL multi-value string functions](./sql-multivalue-string-functions.md) such as `MV_CONTAINS`, which can be optimized by the planner to the same native filters.
```

to the timestamp column, use the string `__time` as the dimension name. Like numeric dimensions, timestamp filters
should be specified as if the timestamp values were strings.

If you want to interpret the timestamp with a specific format, timezone, or locale, the [Time Format Extraction Function](./dimensionspecs.md#time-format-extraction-function) is useful.

#### Example: filtering on a long timestamp value

```json
{
  "type": "equality",
  "dimension": "__time",
  "matchValueType": "LONG",
  "value": 124457387532
}
```

or with a selector filter:

```json
{
  "type": "selector",
  "dimension": "__time",
  "value": "124457387532"
}
```

> #### Example: filtering on day of week using an extractionFn

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example: filtering on day of week using an extraction function
```

> If the user wishes to interpret the timestamp with a specific format, timezone, or locale, the [Time Format Extraction Function](./dimensionspecs.md#time-format-extraction-function) is useful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to interpret the timestamp with a specific format, timezone, or locale, use the [Time Format Extraction Function](./dimensionspecs.md#time-format-extraction-function).
```
